Collapse of the Roman Republic

After Sulla’s death in 78 B.C., two effective and ambitious men, Marcus Licinius Crassus and Cnaeus Pompey were elected as consuls.
They immediately abolished the constitution made up by Sulla.
Pompey was given command to rule Mediterranean and to get rid of pirates by a special law. 
He extended his power until Asia Minor where he gained victory in war. These gave him good reputation, prestige and popular support. These were the qualities that annoyed the Roman Senate, as we saw in the section above.
When Pompey returned to Rome in 63 B.C., the Senate feared that Pompey might establish his own rule like Sulla.
Crassus feared from Pompey’s return to Rome as well.
Crassus lacked military victory to strengthen his power and he did not have the Senate’s confidence either. 
Therefore, Pompey’s return annoyed him that he allied with Gaius Julius Caesar, who was from an old aristocrat family.
Making a surprise, Pompey wanted to withdraw from his office, 
only asked the Senate to admire and appreciate his achievements in the Eastern part of the Roman Empire and wanted land for the veterans in his army.
The Senate did not allow him to do this so that Pompey made alliance with his two enemies Crassus and Caesar against the Roman Senate.
This period is called triumvirate. However, each of them sought for their private interests, which led to the collapse of the Roman Republic.
Caesar was elected consul with extraordinary authority to govern Illyricum and Gaul for five years. First, he had to conquer Gaul in order to gain victory.
His victory in Gaul led to dissolution of alliance of the triumvirate. Crassus died had been killed in 53 B.C. while he was attacking Parthians in the north east of Persia.
It is sufficient here to mention that the war between Parthians and the Romans continued until the beginning of the first decade of the third century A.D. Parthian state was opposing to be ruled by the Romans.
After the death of Crassus, Pompey and Julius Caesar were only to oppose each other.   
Pompey sided with the Senate against Caesar to drive him out, since the Senate was in favor of Pompey to command the Roman interests.
Caesar refused this and a civil war broke out between the forces of the two.
Caesar won over the forces of Pompey and declared himself dictator and took over the government in 49 B.C. 
This was the end of the Republic in Rome.