 the truman show a screen play by andrew m. niccol fade ýn a white title appears on a black screen.  one doesn't discover new lands without consenting to lose sight of the shore for a very long time.  andre gide the title fades off  replaced by a second title.  we're all in this alone.  lily tomlin ýnt. a womb. day. a fiber optic camera observes a five month old male fetus as he gently floats  weightless  suspended in the amniotic fluid of his mother's womb. we focus on the unborn's hand  already a tiny  exquisite work of art  moving towards his newly formed lips. he sucks his thumb. ýnt. hospýtal   delývery room. day. a seconds old baby boy   umbilical cord still attached  smeared with blood and protective skin grease   is held up by an anonymous pair of latex gloves to the camera. shocked by the unaccustomed light and cool of the delivery room  the newborn fights for his first  arduous breath. following almost immediately  a cry. from another angle we see the crying infant on a television screen  the individual lines of the screen clearly visible. match dýssolve to ýnt. car   utopýa  queens. mornýng. the face of the baby thirty four years later  still crying. truman burbank  thinning hair  a body going soft around the edges  appearing older than his thirty four years sits at the wheel of his eight year old oldsmobile cutlass supreme. he cries without shame  making no attempt to wipe away the tears. pausing at an intersection in a quiet  working class suburban street  a spherical glass object suddenly falls from the sky and lands with a deafening crash on the roadway  several yards in front of his idling car. truman exits the oldsmobile to investigate. amidst a sea of shattered glass are the remains of a light mechanism. he looks around him but the street is deserted. he checks that all the surrounding streetlights are accounted for  even though the fallen fixture is far larger. he looks up into the sky but there is no plane in sight. with some effort  truman picks up what's left of the crumpled light  loads it into the trunk of his car and drives away. ýnt. car   traýn statýon parkýng lot. mornýng. truman sits behind the wheel of his car  unscrews the cap of a miniature bottle of jack daniels and empties the contents into his styrofoam cup of coffee. stirring it in with his finger  he burns himself. truman shit  as truman drinks  he becomes aware of the delighted squeals of children coming from the gymnasium of utopia elementary school  adjacent to the parking lot. the sound of the children triggers a memory in his head. ext. long  wýde beach. day  twenty seven years earlýer. unlike a conventional flashback  the scene in his memory appears to be playing on a television screen. a sandy haired  seven year old truman  runs towards a bluff on the beach. the boy's father  kýrk  late thirties  beer bottle in hand  flirts with 2 teenage girls at the shoreline. suddenly  the father remembers his son. he looks anxiously around. the sight of the boy at the far end of the beach causes him to drop his bottle in the sand and run to him. the boy is near the top of the cliff before his agitated father comes within earshot. father  out of breath  clutching his side  truman  truman  stop  truman turns from his perch and waves happily down to his father. but the smile quickly vanishes when he registers the anger and distress on his father's face. father come down now  his father's unnatural anxiety makes the next bay even more tantalizing. the boy considers defying his father. he puts his hand on the rock above him to stretch up and sneak a peek at the other side. one good stretch would do it. father  reading truman's mind  enraged  no  truman  sensing his father is keeping something from him  why  what's there  father  unconvincing  nothing's there. ýt's the same as this.  trace of desperation  come down  please. truman is suddenly aware that the hundreds of other beachgoers have stopped their activities to stare at him. reluctantly he starts to retrace his steps down the rocks. when he finally jumps to the sand  his father grabs him roughly by the arm and drags him away down the beach. father ý told you to stay close. don't ever leave my sight again. you gotta know your limitations. you could've been washed away by the tide. ext. lower manhattan  fýnancýal dýstrýct. mornýng. truman emerges from a subway exit in lower manhattan and walks briskly down the bustling street. a snarl of taxis  buses and commuter traffic. a street vendor thrusts a pretzel under truman's nose  a career woman catches his eye. truman stops at a newspaper stand and plucks an issue of cosmopolitan from the rack  quickly flicking through the glossy pages. glancing in the direction of the newspaper vendor and finding him busy with another customer  truman deftly tears a portion of the open page and pockets the cutting. he guiltily replaces the magazine  startled to find the newspaper vendor standing close behind him. truman  quickly recovering  gimme a copy of  the sydney morning herald . vendor we ran out. truman  hastily departing  thanks anyway. as truman hurries away  the vendor picks up the copy of cosmo and instantly turns to the torn page. ýt is a lancome advertisement with ýsabella rossellýný's nose missing. truman is still in view but the vendor makes no effort to confront him  almost as if he were expecting it. passing one of the tall  black mirrored buildings that grow out of the pavement  truman glimpses himself in the reflective glass. he doesn't like what he sees and attempts to suck in his gut  but quickly concedes defeat. the image triggers another childhood memory. ýnt. schoolroom. day  twenty seven years earlýer. once again  the flashback appears to be playing on a television screen. the sandy haired seven year old truman sits in the middle row of a catholic elementary school classroom surrounded by thirty or  so other well scrubbed  uniformed youngsters. douglas  the boy next to truman is on his feet under the scrutiny of a sixty  year old nun with a face as wrinkled as her habit is starched. douglas ý wanna be a chiropractor like my dad. sýster  impressed  tell the class what a chiropractor does  douglas. douglas he helps people by fixing their backs  sister olivia. sýster that's right  douglas.  holding her back  hamming it up  perhaps ý'll be your first patient. the class titters. douglas sits down  pleased with himself  throwing a smirk to truman. sýster what about you  truman  truman rises to his feet. truman ý want to be an explorer  with reverence   like magellan. the sister's face falls. sýster no one's going to pay you to do that  truman.  with scarcely disguised glee  besides  you're too late. there's nothing left to explore. the class roars with laughter and truman takes his seat. ext. lower manhattan  fýnancýal dýstrýct. mornýng. from truman's pov we see that he is staring up at relief letters that proclaim   american life & accident ýnsurance  ýnc.  above an office building's entrance. a polýce offýcer walking his beat  wanders in truman's direction. from another angle  we observe truman from the police officer's pov   shaky  handheld camera   on a television screen. truman enters the building. ýnt. ýnsurance company   twelfth floor. day. ýn a cramped  cluttered  windowless cubicle  truman talks on the telephone. truman  into receiver   okay  okay  let's call it what it is  ý'm not gonna lie to you life insurance is death insurance you just gotta ask yourself two questions one  in the event of your death  will anyone experience financial loss  and two  do you care   a clerk drops a large reference book on truman's desk. he checks the spine    mortalýty statýstýcs  1986 to present . truman  into receiver  hold on will ya   to clerk  putting receiver to chest  referring to the book  this's no good. lumps all drownings together. ý need drownings broken down by category. the clerk shrugs  returns the book to his trolley and continues his rounds. truman  returning to his call   just think about what ý've been saying and lemme hello   the person on the other end has hung up. with an apathetic shrug  truman replaces the receiver. he looks over his shoulder and places another call. truman  lowering his voice  can you connect me with directory inquiries in sydney  australia   a long delay makes truman even more uncomfortable   er  yes. do you have a listing for a lauren powers   pause   nothing listed  what about a sylvia powers nothing  thanks  truman replaces the receiver  disappointed. ýnt. local ýtalýan delý. lunchtýme. truman stands in line with a crush of other whýte collar workers. as he reaches the counter  the store owner  tyrone  has anticipated his order and ahs already begun preparing a meatball and mozzarella sandwich on ýtalian roll. truman gazes at the sandwich skillfully under construction  pained by his own predictability. tyrone  nauseatngly cheerful  how's it goin'  truman  truman  deadpan  not bad. ý just won the state lottery. tyrone  not listening to truman's reply  as truman anticipated  good. good. truman tyrone  what if ý said ý didn't want meatball today  tyrone  not missing a beat  ý'd ask for identification. truman forces a half smile. we focus on another male offýce worker in line at the cash register  watching truman out of the corner of his eye. about to depart with his sandwich  the man receives a guarded rebuke from the female cashýer. female cashýer  a whisper to prevent truman overhearing  he's right there. you're supposed to pay when he's here. male customer  nonchalant shrug as he departs  he never notices. we re focus our attention on truman who is taking the wrapped sandwich from tyrone. tyrone hold on  truman. ý got somethin' to show ya. tyrone holds up a front page of the new york post that features a photograph of a scaled down replica of columbus' santa maria  moored in front of the manhattan skyline. truman's eyes widen at the photograph. tyrone  referring to the photo  the flagship of christoforo our genoese navigator  huh  ý know you love this like me. truman  averting his eyes with difficulty  not me. you got the wrong man. tyrone tries not to let his disappointment show as truman pays the cashier and exits. tyrone see ya tomorrow  truman. ext. cýty park. day. truman eats lunch alone on a concrete bench in a cement park. from his briefcase he pulls out an old hardcovered book   to the ends of the earth   the age of exploration . a transýent in a wheelchair approaches  looking for a handout. truman gives the homeless man half of his sandwich  reconsiders and gives him it all  his appetite gone. as the transient wheels himself away  truman loses himself in his book. ýnt. a dýmly lýt room somewhere. day. close up on an old man's face. chrýstof. hair pure white  late sixties  a vitality in his eyes that belies his years. he stands beside a floor to ceiling window in a dimly lit room. outside the window  a single palm tree swaying against a deep blue californian sky. a news anchor style earpiece disappears down the neck of the unconventionally cut suit he wears. suspended from the ceiling above his head is a television monitor upon which a surveillance picture of truman  engrossed in his book  silently plays. chloe  twenty something  androgenous looking  similarly suited  joins christof at the window. chrýstof  never taking his eyes from the monitor  you ever pass a car wreck on the side of the road  they're pulling out a body. you know you shouldn't look  but you do. ýnt. a conference room somewhere. day. a group of a dozen men and women of varying ages sit around a circular conference table in a sterile  windowless meeting room. all stare at a single telephone placed in the center of the table  anticipating a call. on cue  the phone rings and one of the men  after waiting for the second ring  picks up. man hello  ý'm sorry  ý got more than enough insurance. he hangs up. after a moment the phone rings again. ýnt. ýnsurance company. day. truman sits at his desk  making a cold call. truman  into receiver   this isn't about insurance  this is about the great variable   when will death occur  could be a week  a month  a year. could happen today a sunbather  minding his own business  gets stabbed in the heart by the tip of a runaway beach umbrella no way you can guard against that kinda thing  no way at all  the prospect on the other end  unimpressed with his pitch  hangs up. truman's supervisor  lawrence  younger than truman by several years  sharper suit  sharper haircut  appears around the corner of the cubicle. lawrence  handing truman some documentation  hey  burbank  ý got a bridge buyer in stapleton ý need you to cloes by four. truman turns pale. truman stapleton on staten ýsland  lawrence  sarcastic  you know another one  truman ý can't do it. lawrence  insistent  a half hour across the bay. sea air. do you good. truman no  ý   searching for a plausible excuse   ý got an appointment uptown. lawrence this is a sure thing.  conspiratorial  they're upping our quota. you need this. lawrence exits the cubicle. truman's head drops. he picks up the framed picture of his wife from his desk. meryl  early thirties  a petite woman easy to mistake for frail. he deposits the photo in his briefcase and departs. ýnt. munýcýpal ferry termýnal. day. truman  briefcase in hand  ashen faced  stands in line for the staten ýsland ferry. as the tourýsts and commuters impatiently brush past him onto the boat  truman remains frozen to the spot  mesmerized by the scummy water rising and falling beneath the dock  triggering a flashback in his head. ext. long ýsland sound. dusk  twenty seven years earlýer. the flashback once again appearing an a television screen  the seven year old truman sits alongside his father  kýrk  in a small sailing dinghy. truman  shouting above the wind  let's go further  daddy  let's go further  father  shouting back  ýt's getting late  truman. truman  entreating his father  please   kirk shakes his head ruefully and indulges his son by heading towards the gathering storm clouds on the horizon. ýnt. munýcýpal ferry termýnal. day. truman turns and begins to fight his way back against the tide of passengers boarding the ferry  emerging back on the street into the bright sunlight  gasping for air. gathering himself  he makes for the entrance of whitehall street subway station. two commuters surrepticiously observe truman as he departs. commuter 1  commenting out of truman's earshot  ý can't believe he's taking the long way. commuter 2 he'll never make it. ýnt. subway traýn. day. truman stands in a packed subway car  anxiously glancing at his watch  wiping his perspiring hairline with a hankerchief. ýnt. taxý. day. a taxi crosses the verrazano narrows bridge towards staten ýsland. truman keeps his eyes shut tight all the way across. refusing to look down at the entrance to new york harbor. ext. bay street  staten ýsland. day. truman finally reaches his destination at a well to do condominium on bay street. as he approaches the lobby  he realizes he has perspiration showing through the armpits of his suit jacket. ýnt. condomýnýum. day. a middle aged concýerge behind a reception desk  is having his hair brushed by a younger man in his mid thirties. anticipating truman's arrival  the hairdresser fusses one more time and swiftly departs through a rear door. truman enters the lobby and approaches the concýerge  trying to keep his arms tightly at his sides to hide the perspiration. truman ý'm here to see a mr hamilton. concýerge you from the insurance company  you missed him. truman when will he be back  concýerge vacation. two months. he waited as long as he could. you was supposed to be here by four. a clock on the wall reads 4:12pm. ýnt. subway. afternoon. truman sits by himself in the rattling subway car  defeated. the only other occupants in the train  a tall woman  mid  thirties  reading a pulp novel and two male youths  late teens  sitting opposite the woman  slouching  ogling her. youth 1  to woman  you wanna read to me  his companion smirks. youth 1  more insistent  you wannna read to me  the woman looks up  unaware of the boys' presence until now. she quickly avoids eye contact and returns to the book. the other boy reaches over and snatches the novel from her grasp. youth 2  menacing  my friend asked you a question. the woman picks up her bag from the floor in a reflex and holds it to her. she looks around the train for assistance  briefly catching truman's eye. the youths also look in truman's direction  staring him down  daring him to interfere. truman quickly averts his gaze. woman  reaching for the book  please  the boy returns the book to the woman  but before doing so rips out the last page from the novel and stuffs it in his shirt pocket. youth 2 now you're gonna have to ask me how it ends. the train pulls into a deserted station. feeling vulnerable  the woman jumps up from her seat and exits. the youths  sensing a chase  also exit. scanning the empty platform  the woman realizes she has made a serious error. truman watches through the train's open door as the boys corner the frightened woman but still he remains in his seat. youth 1 we're gonna tell you how it ends  baby. one of the youths produces a knife from his pocket and waves it in the woman's face. youth 2 don't you wanna know how it ends  the boys pin the woman to the station wall with the weight of their bodies. the woman looks again in truman's direction. again she makes eye contact  eyes pleading. woman  screams  help   please  help   the woman's second scream is muffled as the train door closes. truman looks up to the emergency handle beside the door. there is still time to act. he stands up and half reaches for the handle but moves no further. the train abruptly pulls away  leaving truman time to see one of the youths covering the woman's mouth while the other reaches under her skirt before the train enters the tunnel. truman bows his head in shame as the train rattles on. ýnt. subway statýon. day. the train safely out of sight  the youths promptly release the woman. she calmly hitches down her skirt  no longer afraid. the young men  no longer angry  help fix her hair and retrieve her shoulder bag. woman thanks. the threesome walk along the platform together  as if lifelong friends. woman  pondering the incident  he did nothing. youth 1  shrugs  suddenly more couth  physical violence paralyzes him. always has. ext. truman's house. dusk. the backyard of a modest but tidy one story tract home. beyond the plank fence at the end of the property flows a busy expressway. truman wheels a lawnmower towards the garage as his wife  meryl  pulls up the drive in her four year old toyota camry. she has a sensible blue vinyl bag over her shoulder and carries a new knife set in a wooden block. she kisses truman affectionately on the cheek. meryl  proudly referring to the knife set  ý got it free with the tune up. looking over truman's shoulder  she notices a small uncut patch of grass  missed by truman in one of his passes. meryl you missed a section. meryl enters the house. truman restarts the lawnmower and obediantly pushes it towards the offending patch of lawn. as the mower brushes up against the unconforming blades of grass  truman pulls back abruptly. he checks the kitchen window for meryl and wheels the mower away  leaving the patch uncut. ýnt. truman's house   kýtchen. day. meryl is applying ointment to her wrists as truman enters. truman  referring to her hands  do they hurt  meryl ý was afraid ý'd seize up during cross. one of the keys kept sticking. truman picks up meryl's newspaper and skims idly through it. he notes an article headlined   slayýng trýal enters sýxth week . truman  referring to the article  ýs he gonna take the stand  meryl  dispassionate  matter of fact  no point. two eye witnesses saw him near the dumpster where they found the legs. she flexes her arthritic wrists. meryl you gonna eat before you leave  truman ý'll get something out. meryl  sensing something odd in his demeanor  did something happen today  truman turns to her too sharply  his guilt showing. truman  composing himself  what could happen  ext. unopened freeway. nýght. an abandoned freeway project in queens. the four hundred yard stretch of deserted freeway is paved but unmarked. at one end is an off ramp that abruptly ends in inid air  reinforcing steel protuding from the concrete. truman stands at the end of the off ramp with marlon  thirty  two  the kind of physique some descibe as fat  others big. marlon drinks beer from a can while truman addresses a teed up golf ball with a number three wood. truman winds up and swings  making a healthy contact with the ball. the ball arches away into the night sky  lit by the adjacent operating roadway. from a new angle we see the ball take a huge hop on the outside lane of the abandoned freeway and continue down the asphalt. marlon tosses truman another ball from a bucket of badly scarred golf balls   a ball initialed with the letter   t . truman sets the ball up on the makeshift tee area and launches himself into his second shot. with a slight fade  the second ball carries even further than the first. truman hands marlon their sole golf club without comment. marlon is still looking admiringly in the direction of the shot. marlon ouch. whose nuts were those  truman  opening a beer from the six pack  mine. marlon tees up a ball of his own. initialed with the letter  m . truman ý gotta get out  marlon. marlon  mild interest only  yeah  outta what  truman outta my job  outta queens out  marlon takes a practise swing. marlon outta your job  what the hell's wrong with your job  you gotta great job. you gotta desk job. ý'd kill for a desk job. marlon addresses the ball and swings. a sweeping hook shot that bounces off the freeway out of bounds. marlon  annoyed by the errant tee shot  sonofabitch. truman ýt doesn't mean anything. marlon  still looking in the direction of his ball  nothing means anything. try stocking vending machines for a living. my biggest decision of the day is whether the almond joys look better next to the snickers or the baby ruths. truman selects another  m  ball from the bucket and tosses it to marlon. truman  adamant  ý gotta get out. overcompensating with his second shot  marlon slices the ball in the other direction. a lucky bounce keeps it on the cement fairway. marlon  skeptical  picking up his beer  sure and go where  truman gulps his beer as he prepares his answer. truman  unable to disguise his reverence  australia. marlon  impressed  no shit. where is australia exactly  near england  truman picks up a golf ball to demonstrate. he points to a dimple on his make shift globe. truman see here  this is queens.  sliding his finger around the other side of the ball  all the way round here  australia. you can't get any further away before you start coming back.  tossing the world in his hand  warming to his subject  y'know  there're still places in australia where no human being has ever set foot. marlon  still dubious  so when are you leaving  truman ýt's not that simple. takes money  planning. you can't just up and go.  heading off marlon's skepticism  oh  ý'm gonna do it  don't worry about that. ý just gotta move slow. pick a moment. bonus time's just around the corner. soon as ý get a retaining wall built on the back of the house ý can start thinking about selling up and ý'll be gone. up and away on that big steel bird.  as if to convince himself  ý'm going  don't you worry about that. marlon nods even though the concept of taking flight is beyond his imagination. marlon ý never knew anybody who got out. an awkward moment. truman  once again  not so sure of himself. he masks his doubt by teeing up another ball. dýssolve to ext. freeway. later that nýght. truman and marlon wander down the empty freeway  retrieving the golf balls. as they return them to the bucket they check the initial on each ball to determine the winner of their long drive competition. truman  slightly the worse for drink  tick fucking tock. that's the fucking problem  marlon. ý'm thirty four. ý'm older than jesus christ. marlon looks sideways at truman. ýt sounds to him like the beer talking. truman where do the dreams go  marlon  marlon  picking up the last ball marked with an initial  t   trying to ignore the question  you win. truman ý'm serious. where do the dreams go  marlon  humoring his maudlin friend  they're still there. just buried under what we settled for. they approach truman's oldsmobile. truman opens the trunk to deposit their humble golfing equipment. ýnside are the remains of the fallen light fixture. truman  referring to the light  you really think it could've dropped off an airliner  marlon  unimpressed  sure. ýt's halogen. you oughta report it.  quickly changing the subject  you coming for a drink  truman ý can't tonight. ext. eaton's neck poýnt. dusk  twenty seven years earlýer. the lines of a television screen signal another of truman's flashbacks. a small group of mourners in black  several openly weeping  stand on the end of a small jetty  including the seven  year old truman  dry eyed in an ill fitting suit  his weeping mother  older sister  raquel  and a prýest at the head of the gathering. the priest nods to truman who holds an ornate wreath  heavy and cumbersome in his tiny hands. he heaves it off the dock. match dýssolve to ext. eaton's neck poýnt  long ýsland. nýght  present. a smaller  more simple wreath lands on the calm  dark water beyond the jetty twenty seven years later. truman stares at the wreath for a long moment  turns and wanders back towards the shoreline. ýn his work suit minus his shoes and socks  he sits on the sand. he has a portable tape recorder slung over his shoulder and points a corded microphone at the surf. for a long while we watch truman's impassive face as he makes the recording of the lapping waves  staring up at the handful of stars visible through the gloom. we focus on the lantern room of a nearby lighthouse. from the light's pov  through the green hue of a night vision camera  we observe truman get to his feet and walk towards the dark water. truman  shouting at the surf  ý'm sorry  ý'm sorry  ýnt. dýmly lýt room somewhere. nýght. chrýstof's dispassionate face is reflected in the screen of a television monitor that displays the distraught truman at the water's edge. ýnt. truman's house. nýght. at the formica kitchen table  truman makes calculations in a school notebook  a bottle of beer close at hand. meryl appears in her robe  a glimpse of black negligee beneath  restless. she throws her arms around truman's neck. meryl  suggestive  what are you doing  come to bed. truman  ignoring the suggestion  ý figure we could scrape together eight thousand. meryl  suddenly exasperated  oh. god  everytime you and marlon   truman   we could bum around the world for a year on that. meryl and then what  truman  we'd be back to where we were five years ago. you're talking like a teenager. truman maybe ý feel like a teenager. getting to his feet. truman holds meryl by the arms  talking excitedly to her the way we imagine he did when they were courting. truman meryl  it'd be an adventure. meryl we said we'd try for a baby. ýsn't that enough of an adventure  truman that can wait. ý want to get away. see some of the world. explore. meryl gives a derisive laugh. meryl you want to be an explorer  you mean like all the other great explorers from queens  you don't even have a passport  truman. ý bet you don't even know how to get one. the words sting. truman turns away. seeing the pain she's caused  she changes tack. meryl this'll pass. everybody thinks like this now and then.  making one more attempt at seduction  come to bed. ext. a nýghtwatchman's offýce somewhere. nýght. ýn a nightwatchman's office  two unýformed guards drink coffee. guard 1 how can they have a child  guard 2 ýt's not gonna be his  you idiot. guard 1 why not  guard 2 you think she'd go through with it   reassessing his own opinion  guess ý always thought they'd adopt. ýnt. truman's house   bedroom. nýght. truman stands in the darkened bedroom in his hanes underwear looking down at his bed. meryl has fallen asleep waiting for him  snoring lightly. truman rests his hand tentatively on the bed. the surface rocks. a waterbed. the motion triggers a flashback in his head. ext. long ýsland sound. dawn  twenty seven years earlýer. as always the flashback appears to play on a television screen. the seven year old truman sits on the upturned hull of a small dinghy in calm  deep water. truman  plaintively calling into the mist  daddy   daddy    his cries go unanswered. ýnt. a lývýng room somewhere. nýght. two old women  seventies  sit beside wach other on a sofa against a bare wall  looking directly into camera as they talk. nothing else of the room is seen. old woman 1  playing amateur psychiatrist  ýt left him with more than his obvious fear of the water. ýt's as if he felt his father had gone beyond his limitations and he vowed never to repeat the mistake. he was never the same curious little boy again. old woman 2 we're all born with a pound of cocaine up our nose. by the time we're eleven it runs out. old woman 1 half the people ý knew named their babies after him. ext. lower manhattan. mornýng. truman emerges from the subway station and as usual stops at the newspaper stand. he picks up a copy of vogue and flips through the glossy cosmetic ads  surreptitiously tearing claudýa schýffer's nose from one of the pages. he returns the magazine to the rack and begins his daily pilgrimage to work through the rush hour pedestrian traffic. pausing to check his profile in the mirrored building  he glimpses the reflection of a homeless man standing directly behind him. truman  spellbound by the man  suddenly wheels around to face him. the homeless han is in his late sixties. more well groomed and well fed than the average vagrant  with a serene smile on his face. from a new angle we see a two shot of truman and the man on a television screen. the homeless man places his hand ever so gently on truman's cheek. truman makes no effort to withdraw. he is transfixed by the the man's eyes. he appears to recognize him. truman  almost to himself  mouthing the word  daddy  suddenly a distinguished old woman walking a small dog and a young male busýness executýve carrying a briefcase  walking in opposite directions along the sidewalk  grab the homeless man  one taking each arm. a bus suddenly screeches to a halt beside the struggling group  doors already open  and before truman can react  the old woman and the young executive force the homeless man onto the bus. truman lurches after them  but he is met by the bus doors  closing sharply in his face. truman  to bus drýver  hey  stop  stop   truman thumps against the doors  but the bus drýver ignores his cries and the bus roars away from the curb. he starts to run after the bus  colliding with several pedestrýans who make no attempt to avoid him. stepping blindly into the street  he tries to hail a taxi. a vacant cab suddenly switches off its  for hýre  light as he reaches it. truman pleads with the taxý drýver through the closed windows and locked doors of the cab but the driver is apparently oblivious to truman's shouts. frantic  truman  dashes into a nearby parking structure and grabs a bunch of car keys from the key rack of the unsupervised parking attendant's kiosk. running along the rows of parked cars  truman desperately presses the car security buttons attached to the key rings a car alarm chirps and truman turns in time to see the car's winking sidelights. he jumps inside a brand new bmw and guns the car. the parkýng attendant  alerted by the squealing tires  appears from the men's room and attempts to wave truman down. attendant  running after the car  hey  truman ignores the attendant and accelerates into the street without looking  causing a taxi and a postal van to take evasive action. catching sight of the bus in the distance  truman leans on the car's horn as he recklessly weaves past other motorists. he is only a couple of car lengths from the bus. truman  reading aloud  the ýd number of the bus  two  four  oh  six. suddenly the taxis and cars directly in front of him start to slow for no apparent reason. truman looks for a way around but the cars crab across the street  blocking any passage  working together almost as if they are running interference. truman  shouting at the cars  outta the way  outta the way  the bus is escaping. truman suddenly jumps the sidewalk in the car  scattering pedestrýans. the same cars on the street that seemed intent on slowing his progress suddenly accelerate in unison  anticipating his move. by the time truman reaches the end of the sidewalk  the cars are clustered together on the corner in an impenetrable jam. truman spies the bus turn the corner at the far end of the street and disappear from view. fumbling with the gear stick. he finally finds reverse but turns to find a hostile group of pedestrýans herded tightly together behind the car  leaving truman with nowhere left to go. the car door is suddenly jerked open and the out of breath parkýng attendant yanks truman from the driver's seat. attendant what the fuck are you trying to pull   truman  cowering  the fight instantly gone out of him  ý'm sorry  ý'm sorry  no harm done  no harm done  attendant  feverishly inspecting the fenders for dents  he finds none  ý oughta fuck you up  the attendant looks into truman's terrified eyes. they get the better of him. attendant get the fuck outta here. the attendant shoves truman's briefcase into his arms and brushes him aside. as he departs  truman notices that the traffic jam in the street and the mysterious crowd of pedestrians has dissolved. ext. bus depot. day. row after row of parked buses. truman and marlon exit an administration office. ýnstead of heading for the exit  truman begins marching down the first row of buses  inspecting the number painted on the rear of each one. marlon what're you doing   gesturing to the office  the man told you there's no such bus. truman he's lying. two  four  oh  six was definitely the number. marlon stops walking. truman continues his inspection. seeing there is no reasoning with him  marlon hurries to catch him up. truman ý never believed he was dead. marlon  trying to be patient  c'mon  truman  a lotta times they don't find a body. you know what the currents are like in that water. truman  shudders  a memory flashing in his head  you had to see his face when that wave hit. he wasn't scared marion. ýt was like he was expecting it  waiting for it. he knew it was coming. marlon why would he fake it   trying to make light  he's not elvis presley. truman  ignoring the joke  pondering the morning's events  you know what was really strange about today  an old woman with a little dog and a businessman  walking in opposite directions on the sidewalk  both react like clockwork. they force him onto a bus against his will  a bus that doesn't normally stop outside my building. and when ý'm giving chase  the bus never makes another stop and ý get the feeling that the traffic and the pedestrians are working together to make sure ý never catch up with it. marlon  sarcastic  oh  so now it's also the pedestrians and the buses and the cars  what are you saying  the entire population of lower manhattan is conspiring to stop you finding out that your father staged his death to pursue a life as a street person  oh yeah  that makes sense. truman has no answer. we see an aerial shot of truman and marlon on a television screen  continuing to check the rows of buses  marlon still marveling at truman's obstinance. they have come to the last bus in the final row. truman hangs his head. the offending bus is not amongst them. he makes towards the exit without comment and marlon follows. unseen by the pair  we focus on the ýd number on one of the buses they have previously checked    2400 . a single drip of black paint trickles off the last freshly painted digit. ext. manhattan street. day. truman and marlon  drinking beer  sit in the rear doorway of marion's delivery van  wholesale sized boxes of candy stacked behind them. truman you think ý imagined it  don't you  marlon ý think you're missing your dad.  trying to be delicate  the anniversary was yesterday  wasn't it  truman is surprised marlon remembered. marlon nods to the sidewalk. marlon you got sand in your cuffs. truman looks down at his feet. a small  tell tale pile of sand has poured out of his tight trouser cuff. truman maybe you're right. ýf only the old woman hadn't left her dog behind. we see a flashback in truman's head of the earlier scene in the lower manhattan street. ýt confirms that the old woman's dog was abandoned on the sidewalk. ýnt. truman's mother's apartment  queens. day. truman stands in the corridor of his mother's cramped  fussy. doilyed apartment with his older sister  raquel  late forties  prematurely grey. through a doorway  the figure of his mother is visible asleep in bed  despite the early hour. truman and raquel speak in hushed tones to avoid waking her. raquel don't you dare go in. truman. ý just got her off to sleep. truman ýt was dad. ý swear. raquel fixes truman with a contemptuous stare. raquel well  the next time he shows up. bring him over. until then  ý'm not saying a word about this to mom and neither are you. truman ýf it wasn't him  it was his twin. can you think of a reason he'd want to hide from us  racquel ý know a reason he'd want to hide from you. look at how you treat us. you live ten minutes away  we hardly see you from year to year and then you turn up with this story so insane you don't even believe it yourself. haven't you hurt her enough  truman  she already blames you. truman  incredulous  ý was seven years old  raquel but you're here and he's not. has it really taken you this long to invent a story to ease your conscience  truman ý'm telling you he's alive  raquel  snapping back bitterly  and ý'm telling you he's fish food  truman meets her unforgiving eyes. without another word  he walks out of the apartment. truman safely departed  the figure in the bed  rolls out. chrýstof  fully clothed  relishing the danger of being so close to truman without being detected. raquel's demeanor immediately changes  all trace of bitterness gone from her face  she appears younger  posture more upright  almost a different person. christof hugs raquel. chrýstof you did well. ýnt. dressýng room somewhere. nýght. a cavernous dressing room contains a long row of identical mirrored make up tables. at the only occupied table  truman's contrite father  kýrk  is having what's left of his homeless disguise cleaned from his face by a make up artýst under the watchful eye of two dark suýted bodyguards. from a mezzanine floor out of kirk's vision  chrýstof and chloe also take in the proceedings. behind their heads  a monitor shows a surveillance picture of an agitated truman sitting in his car  trapped in rush hour traffic. chloe we've tightened security. christof nods indifferently  knowing the damage is already done. chloe  referring to kirk  why would he do this to us  chrýstof old age. sentiment. you play someone's father all those years  you are someone's father he sees the way truman is. he feels responsible. christof turns and enters an office adjacent to the balcony  containing a state of the art monitor and vcr. chloe follows. christof plays the cued recording without comment. we focus on the screen. ext. long ýsland sound. day  twenty seven years earlýer. a younger looking chrýstof sits in a motorboat in the calm water of long ýsland sound. truman's father  kýrk  twenty seven years younger and a dark haýred boy  truman's age at the time  acting as a stand in  sit in the stern of a sailing dinghy. two scuba dývers in the ocean. young chrýstof  barking instructions to kirk   as soon as we give the cue  tack to windward  kirk rehearses turning the tiller in the instructed direction. young chrýstof the freak wave will strike from the starboard side. remember  you don't go to the diver. the diver goes to you. to simulate the wave  one of the divers puts his full weight on the side of the dinghy to capsize it. kirk and the boy are tossed into the water. while the boy immediately bobs to the surface in his life jacket  kirk fails to surface. after a long moment  he reappears with the second diver some distance away. now wearing a spare aqualung. young chrýstof  good  good  of course  on the day you only surface once you're safely beyond the cove try it one more time you okay  kirk is staring at truman's stand in  clinging to the upturned boat. kirk's expression suggests he is not a totally willing participant in the masquerade. the present day christof freezes the monitor on kirk's uncertain face. ýnt. truman's garage. dusk. a cluttered garage  dimly lit by a single work lamp. truman looks over his shoulder before turning his attention to a dusty trunk under a canvas sheet. the trunk is fastened with a combination lock. he deftly dials the correct combination and opens the lid. ýnside  mementoes from his youth. a  how to saýl  book  a stack of  great exflorers  magazines  and beneath it all  a garment in a drycleaning bag. truman carefully lifts up the plastic to reveal a schoolgirl's lavender cardigan decorated with pearl beading. he puts the cardigan to his nose and breathes deeply. footsteps. truman hastily drops the cardigan in the trunk and shuts the lid. meryl  standing close behind. meryl what're you doing out here  truman  turning attention to an upturned mower on the garage floor  fixing the mower. meryl doesn't look like she buys it. meryl  concerned  your sister called. she was worried about you. truman  matter of fact  ý saw my father on state street dressed as a homeless man. meryl  attempting to comfort  ý kept seeing my brother for years after he died. truman  irritated at her subtle dismissiveness  what do you want  meryl ý made macaroni. truman ý gotta go out. about a replacement   hastily adding   mower blade. meryl nods  not at all convinced. after an uncomfortable pause  she turns and heads back to the house. ext. car wash. dusk. truman ruefully examines the broken car aerial on his freshly washed oldsmobile. ýn the background is the warning sign he has just ignored   close wýndows  lower aerýals . truman removes the metal coathanger from beneath the lavender cardigan and forces the bent wire into what's left of the severed aerial. ýnt. truman's car. dusk. truman motors down a busy shopping street  crowded on both sides with pedestrýans. as he drives  he tests his car radio. adjusting the tuner knob  he finds a station. female voýce  from radio   west on atlantic he's making a right on woodhaven  truman glances up at the street signs along his route and finds that they coincide exactly with the streets quoted on the radio. distracted  he almost bowls over an old lady on a crosswalk. male voýce  from radio   god  truman almost hit marilyn  he's on the move again  passing the burger king  truman readjusts the radio as it starts to fade out. suddenly there is a piercing blast of feedback. he looks up and  as far as the eye can see  every pedestrýan  motorýst and shopkeeper along the street suddenly winces in pain and holds their right ear at exactly the same moment. male voýce  from radio  in distress himself   something's wrong. change frequencies  truman tries to pick up the channel once again but without success. ext. drug store. dusk. still shaken by his experience with the radio  truman exits a drug store with a small  brown paper bag. out of the corner of his eye he catches a male bystander still checking his right ear with his finger. he goes to say something to the by stander but thinks better of it. ext. redlýght dýstrýct  queens. nýght. hookers in white heels and spray on skirts display their wares. truman cruises slowly past in his oldsmobile  the expression of the prostitutes turning from seductive to contemptuous as each is by passed. suddenly truman pulls sharply into the curb beside a leggy  prostitute  veronýca  wearing a platinum blonde wig. she is in deep discussion with a fellow workýng gýrl. veronica recognizes the car and instantly bends down to the open passenger window. veronýca hey  truman  where you bin  you bin cheatin' on me  veronica opens the door and folds herself into the passenger seat. ýnt. truman's car. nýght. veronýca knows the form. as truman pulls away from the curb  she is already removing the lavender cardigan from the drycleaning bag on the back seat. she drapes the cardigan around her shoulders. veronýca bout time you got this thing cleaned.  half joking  don't tell me you bin makin' your old lady wear it. truman passes her the brown paper bag without reply. veronica removes a bottle of perfume and proceeds to liberally apply it. veronýca  examining the bottle  god  do they still make this stuff  what's the sell by date  ýnt. flushýng meadow park. nýght. from a vantage point in a disused tower high above the park. chrýstof and chloe watch as truman's oldsmobile enters the park grounds and comes to a stop near the large metal framed globe  the unisphere. both christof and chloe wear earpieces  a miniature television propped at their feet shows a close up picture of truman and veronýca inside the car. chloe  into a flip phone  condescending   you see him messing with the antenna what did you think would happen   lapse of concentration   is that what you call it  ý call it amateur hour   sarcastic  ýn case you hadn't noticed  we don't get to do it over. christof  totally unfazed  regards his zealous young assistant with affection and even a mild amusement. chloe  as she hangs up  querying the smile that plays around his lips  you think this is funny  chrýstof the mask has slipped before. everything can be explained. truman kills the lights and he and veronýca exit the car unaware that they are being observed. chrýstof  adopting a more serious tone as he returns his attention to truman  what's dangerous is that he makes the connection between what happened today and the girl. we focus on truman and veronica as they take a seat at the edge of the pool surrounding the great steel globe. veronýca like ý say  ý don't normally do this. ý gotta charge extra. truman nods his agreement and forks over several bills. veronica deposits the money in her purse and perches herself as modestly as possible on the edge of the fountain. when she is ready  truman tenderly places his arm around her shoulder. veronica responds  hesitantly  becoming immersed in her role. she reaches out her own hand and rests it on the nape of his neck. slowly both heads drift together  but stop just short of their lips meeting  agonizingly close. so close they can feel each other's breath  barely a sliver of daylight separating them. then finally their lips touch in the most gentle of caresses. they hold the kiss for another long moment and then simultaneously break. as they look into each other's eyes  truman goes to say something but veronica hushes him by placing a finger to his lips. then abruptly she moves out of frame  the cardigan falling from around her shoulders in her haste. from truman's pov we focus on the cardigan on the pavement  triggering a flashback in his head. ýnt. hýgh school corrýdor. day  seventeen years earlýer. as with truman's previous flashbacks  this scene appears to be playing on a television screen. however  on this occasion it is also accompanied by chrýstof's comments from his perch in the tower above the park. chrýstof  v.o.  he's re created the event on and off for a number of years. we've never understood what prompts him to indulge the fantasy  or for that matter what inspired such a painfully shy boy to approach her in the first place  a seventeen year old truman  carrying a stack of books  spies lauren  sixteen going on thirty five  wearing the lavender  beaded cardigan at her open locker. she is entertaining two gýrlfrýends with what appears to be a lewd tale. chrýstof  v.o.  we'd noticed them making eyes at each other for some weeks but never thought he'd say anything. she was a year older  wrote poetry  way out of his league  truman  obviously terrified  musters the nerve to approach the lockers. the 3 girls look up  surprised by the interruption. truman  to lauren  tongue tied  a strangled greeting  hi. gýrlfrýend 1  to lauren as the two girlfriends abruptly depart  see you in class. lauren is unsure whether or not to follow her friends. truman lauren  right  her name is carefully written in blue ink on the covers of her text books. lauren no. truman  ignoring her lack of interest  look. ý was wonder   lauren   ý can't go out with you. truman ý haven't asked you yet. lauren well when you do  that's my answer.  softening  ý'm sorry. ýt's not up to me. truman  summoning up courage from somewhere  why  you married  lauren smiles despite herself. truman ý'm not asking you to have my children  just a pizza. how about saturday  lauren  adamant  no. truman friday  lauren looks around the deserted school corridor. lauren now. truman right now  we got finals. lauren ýf we don't go now  it won't happen. truman hesitates. lauren  impatient  looking anxiously around  well  what do you want to do  the pýcture on the televýsýon screen suddenly fast forwards at such speed ýt becomes a blur   then returns to normal speed. ext. flushýng meadow park. dusk. the seventeen year old truman and lauren enter the park near the unisphere. the park is deserted on a hot june afternoon. chrýstof  v.o.  we knew we were taking a risk. she hadn't been properly coached  but we were torn  he'd summoned the courage to make the approach we wanted to reward that. of course she took full advantage  truman and lauren run up to the ledge of the pool surrounding the steel sculpture. lauren ý never knew this place existed. they both stare down at the inviting water. lauren suddenly throws off her cardigan and jumps into the pool without another thought. she comes splashing to the surface. truman stares down  transfixed hy the shimmering water. lauren come on  come on  ýt's wonderful  truman  nervous  ý ý can't. lauren suddenly stops splashing. lauren that's right. oh  god  ý'm sorry. she quickly climbs out of the pool  dripping wet. truman  confused  why  you've got nothing to be sorry about. has someone been talking to you  lauren wrings out her dress. lauren  to the sky  upset  get me out of here. ý don't want to be here. lauren starts walking away. truman  confused  calling after her  what are you talking about  lauren  lauren  truman runs after lauren and holds her by the arms  forcing her to face him. lauren  distraught  my name's not lauren  ýt's sylvia  truman looks into her eyes and believes her. the pýcture fast forwards agaýn at hýgh speed for a moment and returns to normal. truman and sylvýa  as she is now called throughout the remainder of the movie  sit on the ledge of the pool   the same spot as truman and the hooker  veronica  seventeen years later. as we have just seen imitated  sylvia and truman kiss with great delicacy. truman goes to say something but she covers his lips with her finger. sylvýa ýn a minute someone's going to come and stop me talking to you. truman  looking around the deserted park  who  there's no one around. sylvýa  covering his lips once again  you remember when you were a little boy  you stood up in class and said you wanted to be an explorer like magellan. and your teacher  sister olivia said   you're too late  truman. there's nothing left to explore.  and all the other kids laughed. and you sat down. truman  incredulous  how do you know about that  sylvýa ýt doesn't matter. you've forgotten about that boy  truman. you got scared. just because something happens  doesn't mean you can't take another chance in your life. truman ý don't understand. sylvýa  looking over her shoulder nervously  there isn't much time. just listen. everybody's pretending truman. everybody but you.  pointing to the buildings on the horizon  look at that project. you think anybody lives there  ýt's all for you  truman. a show. the eyes are everywhere. truman  protesting  eyes  where  sylvýa  frustrated  raving  everywhere  disguised truman  they're going to fill your head with lies. you've got to make yourself deaf  you understand  when you're afraid the most  it means you're on the right track. trust that boy. promise me you'll do that  truman nods  unsure of the commitment he is making. suddenly a 1962 plymouth roars towards the fountain out of nowhere. sylvýa  scared  ý told you  truman  the car skids to a stop and a large man  40ish  with a shock of dark hair jumps from the car. the man yanks the frightened sylvia to her feet causing her cardigan to fall to the ground. truman  shocked  hey  man  to sylvia  get in the car  lauren  truman jumps up. truman  to the man  who are you   man ý'm her father  sylvýa no he's not  he's just saying that  does he look anything like me   truman shut your mouth  the man backhands sylvia roughly across the face and bundles her into his car. truman rushes at the man. truman leave her alone  the man easily fends truman off  knocking him to the ground. he slams shut the passenger door of the plymouth. man  to sylvia  ý told you not to come here anymore   to truman  who is getting to his feet  which one are you  truman is suddenly struck dumb  the doubts start crowding back into his head. sylvýa  calling out from the car  don't listen to him  truman. make yourself deaf. come find me. man  to truman  getting into the car  don't bother  we're moving to australia. new york's done something to her head. the plymouth roars away. truman stares after it and then turns back to the cardigan left on the ground. chrýstof  v.o.  why did he say australia  why couldn't he have said new jersey  ext. flushýng meadow. dusk  present day. veronýca's head suddenly appears back in frame beside truman. veronýca you want me to do it again  ý think ý could do it better. truman  coming back to reality  no thank you. truman picks up the cardigan. they return to the car. ýnt. truman's car. nýght. truman drives veronýca back to her turf. she smokes a cigarette  flicking ash out of the window. truman veronica  what do you know for sure  veronýca for sure   taking a long drag on her cigarette as she gives the question due consideration  the nuns at my school  they used to say   the whole of life is faith.  truman regards his companion in a new light. he comes to a stop at the corner where he picked her up. veronýca  giving truman an affectionate peck on the cheek  on the house. ýnt. hýgh school corrýdor. day  seventeen years earlýer. another televised flashback. the seventeen year old truman stands reflectively beside sylvia's open and vacated locker. chrýstof  v.o.  we removed all physical trace of her but we couldn't erase the memory  another short burst of fast forward and then the pýcture returns to normal speed. ýnt. hýgh school lýbrary. day ýn a secluded corner of the library the seventeen year old truman sits at a table surrounded by a stack of glossy women's magazines. by tearing out individual facial features   eyes. nose  mouth  ears  chin  hair   from photographs of young women in the magazine's advertisements  truman has been able to improvise a composite picture of sylvia. the montage is a passable likeness although truman is not completely satisfied with sylvia's nose. he toys with several nose examples before reluctantly settling for one. he stares wistfully at the completed picture. another burst of fast forward ýnt. seventeen year old truman's house. day. seventeen year old truman enters the front door. his older sister  raquel  has been awaiting his arrival. chrýstof  v.o.  when he decided to go after sylvia  we were forced to intervene once again  truman  excited  ý've got something to tell you  sis. raquel  adopting a low  serious tone  ý've got something to tell you too. truman  unable to contain his news  ý'm going to australia. raquel mom's real sick. truman's face falls. as he enters the bedroom where his ill mother lies gazing at the ceiling  we focus on his exchange student applýcatýon that he has inadvertently crushed in his hands. the flashback sequence over  we return to the present týme wýth the ýmage no longer appearýng on a televýsýon screen. ýnt. truman's car. nýght truman turns into his street but stops several houses short of his own driveway and kills the car's engine. ýn the light of a streetlamp  truman opens his briefcase and removes the framed photograph of his wife  meryl. but he turns his wife's face away from him and opens the clasps on the back of the frame. removing the backing  he exposes the composite picture of sylvýa we witnessed in the flashback of his youth  worn and faded by the years. with the frame on his lap  truman retrieves a handful of paper fragments from his jacket. noses. he tests the likeness of each one in turn. unsatisfied that any of the new noses is an improvement  truman tosses them out of his car window. we watch the paper fragments blowing in the breeze as truman's car proceeds down the street and into his driveway. ext. sylvýa's beach house. day. close up on a nose. we pull back to reveal that the nose belongs to sylvýa  seventeen years older than truman's composite picture   slimmer in the face  wearing her hair shorter. she is standing at the water's edge on a long  deserted windswept beach  several sailing dinghys pulled up beyond the high water line. ýn the background  a solitary  white beachfront house   an other worldliness to the idyllic scene. looking up into the sky  sylvia's attention is drawn to a piece of paper carried on the ocean breeze. the paper catches on the mast of one of the sailing dinghys. a page from a newspaper  carrying a photograph of truman in the street where he encountered his father. sylvia retrieves the page. the article's headline reads   truman's fate ýn doubt . spying a man  late thirties  kindly face  riding up to the beach house on an old bicycle  sylvia secrets the page under her sweater. the man waves cheerfully as he comes to join her on the sand. sylvia waves cheerfully back. ýnt. bar somewhere. nýght. ýn a quiet bar  a waýtress patiently explains her viewpoint to the barman. a patron on a barstool  eavesdrops. waýtress she was willing to lose him if it meant he could find himself.  registering the barman's blank look  never mind. ext. traýn statýon parkýng lot. mornýng. truman sits in his car  about to lace his coffee. from inside the adjacent elementary school gymnasium  he hears the familiar excited squeals and shouts of school chýldren. truman suddenly throws aside his miniature of jack daniels and sprints across the parking lot and into the school. ýnt. utopýa elementary school. mornýng. truman slams through the front doors into the reception area. ýt is deserted  no one stationed at the administration desk  the corridors empty. he runs down a vacant corridor  pushing open classroom doors as he goes. they are all unoccupied. finally  he stands outside the gymnasium. the childrens' voices can still be heard. truman takes a deep breath and bursts through the double doors. the room is empty save for a large reel to reel tape recorder in the middle of the basketball court playing a continuous tape of childrens' voices. the recorder is attached to speakers on tall stands facing the ventilation ducts. truman stares at the machine in disbelief. ext. lower manhattan street. mornýng. truman exits the subway  still lost in thought. he stops at the newstand and picks up a copy of vanity fair to resume his ritual search but his heart is not in it. he starts his trek to work  pausing to stare at his reflection in the mirrored building  hoping that the homeless man will appear at his side once again. but no one joins him. however  as truman continues to stare  it is the building itself that takes his interest. an imposing forty story office building  a black  sheer mirrored box clad in the kind of reflective glass that shields its occupants from the world  a building truman passes every day. as usual  a steady stream of employees and výsýtors enter and exit the building's high ceilinged lobby past an intimidating security desk manned by two unýformed guards. beyond security are banks of elevators  ferrying executives  clerical staff and delivery personnel to and from their floors of business. truman abruptly enters the building. he strides confidently past the security desk trying to look as if he belongs. securýty guard 1  to truman  can ý help  truman  sneaking a glance at the building directory  ý have an appointment at  er diamond enterprises. securýty guard 1 they went bust.ýnt. truman's car  westchester. dusk. truman is forced to slow once again behind a line of other cars at a police roadblock. at the head of the line  the cars are being turned around by polýce offýcers  who are also contending with a swarm of news reporters and televýsýon crews. truman  to meryl  ýt's hard to go places  isn't it  meryl there's been an accident  truman. we have to go back. truman no. there's no accident. ýt's just more stalling. truman slows beside a polýce offýcer. truman what's going on  offýcer  grim faced  indicating the nearby ýndian point nuclear power plant  leak at the plant. they had to shut her down. truman ýs there any way around  offýcer the whole area's being evacuated. a precaution. truman falls in line behind the cars making a u turn when  all of a sudden  he guns his car and swerves past the barricade. ext. sylvýa's beach house. dusk. ýn the twilight sun  sylvýa's guests wander up the gravel path  leading away from the beach house  the younger children carried in their parents' arms. hanging back from the rest of the group  sylvia's admirer  wheeling his bicycle  turns back to the house. as the man is about to lean his bicycle against the side of the beach house  he looks in a window. lit by a blue glow  sylvýa sits transfixed by the television playing in her antique bureau  the screen obscured from our view. she is unaware of the man's face at the window. recognizing what is playing on the screen  the man regards sylvia with a resigned smile. he mounts the bicycle and rides back up the path. ext. nuclear power plant. dusk. truman's car slides to a stop  blocked by hazardous waste vehicles straddling the roadway leading up to the power plant  the pursuing police car blocking his retreat. truman flees the car  leaving meryl in the passenger seat. meryl truman   come back   truman bursts past the alien looking hazardous waste workers in their protective suits carrying detection instruments. the workers give chase in their cumbersome suits  trying to cut off his path to the power plant. as he crests a slight rise beyond the plant  he is finally tackled to the ground. however  peering through the long grass  truman is able to make out the lights of a cityscape in the distance. ýnt. control room. dusk. chrýstof  a trace of panic in his eyes  turning to chloe. chrýstof did he see it  chloe ý don't think so. the reason for christof's concern becomes all too apparent as the helicopter passes over the power plant  where the struggling truman is being escorted away. we see an aerial shot from the helicopter as it emerges directly above the sydney skyline. ýnt. truman's house   kýtchen. nýght. meryl and truman sit at their kitchen table. truman stoic  tears rolling down meryl's cheeks. truman's airline ticket torn to shreds on the table in front of them. meryl let me get you some help  truman. you're not well. truman  ignoring her tears and medical advice  why do you want to have a child with me  you can't stand me. meryl that's not true. truman  suddenly angry  don't lie to me  truman's raised voice backs meryl to her feet. truman follows  getting in her face. truman tell me what's happening   meryl  frightened but remaining poised  ý thought you knew everything. what could ý tell you  truman  backing her up against the kitchen bench  you're part of this  aren't you   meryl grabs a kitchen knife from a wooden block to protect herself. meryl truman  you're scaring me  truman looks in her eyes and  with surprising swiftness  grabs her wrist and disarms her. truman no  you're scaring me  meryl  truman grabs meryl by the hair and turns the knife on her. while pressing the blade to meryl's throat  truman starts to march her around the room  talking to the walls  light fixtures  a mirror  doorknob  framed picture  blank television. truman stop this now or ý kill your leading lady.  to a lamp  ý know you can hear me. ýnt. control room. nýght. chrýstof and the others watch the monitors spellbound as truman looks directly into one camera lens after another. roman is the first to crack. roman  entreating christof  get somebody in there  chrýstof  quiet but firm  no. sýmeon  siding with the executive  showing his true colors  she's in trouble  we've got to help her  christof  never taking his eyes from the monitor  leans into the microphone. ýnt. truman's house   kýtchen. nýght. we see an extreme close up of meryl's ear. unheard by truman  from her inner car  we hear a familiar voice. chrýstof  o.c.  he's bluffing. call his bluff. meryl  in reply to the voice in her head  half strangled due to the pressure of the knife  do something  upon hearing her remark  truman's eyes widen. sensing that she too is addressing a third person  he jerks her head around to read her face. truman  wild eyed  who are you talking to   meryl  incredulous  you're the one talking to the walls  truman no. you said   do something.  who were you talking to  ý swear ý'll kill you  if you don't tell me. meryl takes the chance to spin out of his grasp and dashes to the bedroom but before she can barricade the door  truman forces his way inside. they both tumble onto the waterbed causing it to rock back and forth. gripping meryl's hair  truman throws aside the bed covers. truman  distraught  referring to the bed  how could you buy this damn thing when you know he drowned in front of me   truman raises the kitchen knife but instead of stabbing meryl begins to slash viciously at the waterbed  opening a large gash. truman you have any idea what it's like to drown  truman drops the knife and forces meryl's head into the gaping hole in the bed  submerging her head in the tepid water. she thrashes her arms wildly trying to free herself. truman reluctantly jerks her head back out of the water. meryl  gasping for air  truman  stop it   to the ceiling  don't let him do it  truman  to a light fixture  threatening  ý'll kill her  he dunks her head into the water a second time  holding her head down longer this time. she continues to struggle. suddenly  the front door chimes. startled  truman lets meryl up for air. truman  sneering at meryl  right on time. cops must be telepathic. meryl spots the kitchen knife within her reach but truman beats her to it. grabbing the knife by the blade  he slices his hand. truman  wincing in pain  damn  at knifepoint  truman marches meryl down the hallway to the front door. the doorbell chimes a second and third time  more insistently. truman  shouting through the closed door  stay where you are or ý'll kill her  marlon  o.c.  truman  ýt's me  marlon. truman flinches. he was so convinced it would be the police. he takes a step back against the hallway wall. before he can decide what to do  marlon has opened the unlocked front door to be confronted with the sight of truman holding the knife to meryl's throat  blood streaming from his own wound. marlon locks eyes on truman. sizing up the situation  he slowly but decisively removes the knife from truman's hand. meryl wrenches herself free from truman's now limp grasp  and collapses into marlon's arms  sobbing. meryl  distraught  dropping character  forgetting herself  they were going to let him kill me  ext. abandoned freeway. nýght. marlon and truman  both nursing bottles of beer  sit on the end of their abandoned freeway off ramp. truman people know who ý am  my every move  complete strangers know my name. even when there's no one around  ý feel the eyes on me. marlon  reluctant admission  ý was in the bank today. the federal on lewis. a clerk was talking about somebody named truman messing with her baby. ýs that the stranger you're talking about  truman closes his eyes as he takes in the explanation. truman  half to himself  refusing to accept it  no. no. ý've never seen her before.  registering marlon's skepticism  ý know you already think ý'm going out of my mind but ý genuinely believe the world revolves around me somehow. everybody seems to be in on it. marlon ýt's a lot of world for one man. you sure that's not wishful thinking  you wishing you'd made something more of yourself  christ  truman  who hasn't sat on the john and had an imaginary interview with barbara walters  who hasn't wanted to be somebody  truman that's just it. ý think ý am somebody. marlon  sympathetizing  ý used to dream all my friends and family got together in a hotel room  thinking of ways to fuck me up. truman sometimes ý think it's in my head  sometimes ý think it's for real. marlon looks around as if drawing inspiration from somewhere in the night. marlon tru  we've known each other since before we could get a hard on. truman half smiles at the ribald remark. marlon the only way we ever made it through high school was cheating off each other's test papers. jesus  they were identical. ý always liked that  because whatever the answer was  we was right together and we was wrong together. truman nods fondly at the memory. marlon the only night either of us ever spent in jail  we spent together and ý wet myself but you never told anyone. ý was best man at your wedding and my brother was best man at my wedding and you didn't talk to me for a month over that and ý didn't blame you because you've been more of a brother to me than he's ever been. and ý never shoulda let my goddam father talk me into that. truman is slowly coming around. marlon's speech from the heart soothing away his pain. marlon ý know things haven't worked out for either of us like we used to sit up on freemont street all night and dream they would. we all let opportunities pass us by  none of us asks for the dance as often as we should. ý know that feeling when it's like everything's slipping away and you don't want to believe it so you look for answers someplace else. but  well  the point is  ý would gladly step in front of traffic for you. truman grins a melancholy grin  nearly all the way back. we see a close up of marlon's ear. from inside  unheard by truman  chrýstof dictates marlon's heartfelt speech. ýnt. control room. nýght. chrýstof leans over a microphone at the mixing desk  feeding the lines to marlon  immersed in the role. chrýstof  hushed tones   and the last thing ý'd ever do is lie to you  recognizing the importance of the moment  his colleagues stand around in awe at christof's spontaneous performance  arguably superior to marlon's own delivery. marlon  staring into truman's eyes  repeating the words in his ear  and the last thing ý'd ever do is lie to you.  pause  think about it  truman  if everybody's in on it  ý'd have to be in on it too. ý'm not in on it cos there is no it. truman's head slowly drops in surrender  his doubts draining away. marlon embraces truman in a bearhug. truman looks over his shoulder to the sky where a single star shines. ýnt. control room. nýght. from his chair  chrýstof modestly accepts the congratulations of his colleagues. by artificial starlight  truman begins his long descent of the step ladder. below  a studio tram makes its way along the soundstage perimeter  on the last tour of the day. ýnt. studýo tram. dusk. as he drives  a well scrubbed  young tour guýde delivers his tired commentary into a microphone for the thousandth time to the half full tram of studýo výsýtors. guýde  the soundstage roof houses over eight hundred thousand lights of varying intensities to faithfully recreate the constellations  however  the passengers are paying less attention than usual. they stare  perplexed  at the television monitor above the guide's head  continuing to play the show's only available shot of the open door in the sky. ýnt. soundstage. dusk. truman suddenly steps in front of the tram. the tour guýde stands on the brakes  tram lurching to a stop. the guide looks from truman's haunted face to the monitor  hardly able to believe his eyes. truman leaps on board  pressing his flare gun into the side of the guide's head. truman  to the shocked passengers  nobody move   to the guide  drive  the terrified guide pulls jerkily away in the tram  resuming the tour. truman  to the guide  gesturing to the microphone  keep talking. say whatever you say  the guide hesitantly resumes his commentary into his microphone. guýde er  the ocean tank contains over six hundred and fifty million gallons of man made salt water  temperature controlled  truman's attention drifts to the logo on the side of the tram    truman studýo tour . he is suddenly aware of the tourists gawking at him. truman  to tourýst  camcorder around his neck  act normal  keep filming  truman ducks out of sight as a fleet of studýo securýty cars speeds towards the tram. but they streak past  on their way to the site of truman's escape. as he tentatively gets back to his feet  truman finds a chýld standing in front of him with an autograph book. chýld please  mister truman. on the child's t shirt  a large photograph of truman's face. ýnt. control room. dusk. chrýstof talks anxiously on the phone  unaware of a shift in the balance of power taking place behind his back. the executives  moses and roman are huddling with sýmeon  making him an offer he appears to welcome. chrýstof  into the phone  what do you mean he's not there  we can't have lost him again. on the far side of the control room  behind a huge curved glass wall on a mezzanine floor  a studio tour tram passes by. ýnt. studýo tram. dusk. truman crouches behind a seat on the tram  flare gun still trained on the guide's head  taking in the gigantic video wall displaying pictures from every facet of his life. his heart sinks as he spies the monitor revealing the private spot where he and sylvýa met. guýde  on your left  the control room where the angles are selected and the actors receive direction. of course  the one place we can't show you is the story department. there is none.  hesitant   truman writes the script  from truman's pov we watch chloe approach christof. she has a pure white envelope in her hands. as christof looks up to acknowledge her  he almost makes eye contact with truman on the tram. ýnt. studýo lot. dusk. still inside the studio complex  the tram enters the courtyard of an indoor shopping mall. truman gift shops. truman is momentarily frozen by the sight of window displays full of books and board games carrying his likeness with titles such as   trumantrivia . video cassettes offering  truman highlights . his face emblazoned on t shirts  caps  coffee mugs and posters. even truman dolls and a model of his decaying oldsmobile are offered for sale. the tram slows to a stop behind other trams at the tour's end. studýo polýce are checking the disembarking passengers. truman  using the tour guýde as a shield  also exits the tram. guýde  frightened for his life  here he is  ýt's him  truman contemptuously backhands the guide across the face and makes a run for it. the guards give chase. truman runs into a lookalike mannequin  dressed in a brown suit identical to his own  promoting  trumanwear . he pulls his  double  to the ground to block the guards' path. sprinting along a featureless corridor  he reaches a dead end. guard  into radio  we've got him trapped. truman enters a doorway marked  no entry  to find a stairway leading upwards. he takes the stairs three at a time. the footsteps and shouts of the guards not far behind. flight after flight of stairs. at one point  he loses his grip on the stair's railing and his gun falls from his hand  clattering for an eternity down the stairwell. he finally emerges on a landing. lungs bursting. one more door. he tries the handle. ýt opens. ext. soundstage. dusk. truman finds himself on the roof of the soundstage. outside. really outside for the first time in his life. he looks frantically around him. nowhere to hide. the soundstage stretches for miles in both directions as far as the eye can see  an interminable expanse of roof. facing him  a colossal burbank. several other soundstages almost as gigantic as his own. the palm trees lining the streets  dwarfed by the mammoth barns. the hollywood freeway in the distance  carrying its ribbons of traffic  twenty lanes wide. gargantuan office buildings eclipse any skyscraper truman has ever known. directly below him  a dizzying drop to the studio lot and its arched entranceway. above him  a large yellow moon in the twilight sky. the real moon  not the planetarium projection he has been contemplating for the last thirty four years. truman wheels around  suddenly realizing he is not alone. a group has emerged on the rooftop  standing still and silent in a semi circle  cutting off any escape. along with the studýo guards  keeping their distance in the background  are chloe  sýmeon  and the two studio executives  moses and roman. ýn front of them  the co stars in his life   marlon  meryl  sister raquel  mother audrey and supposedly dead father kýrk. no one moves or speaks as truman scans the familiar faces. marlon  in particular  cannot look him in the eye. truman's gaze finally falls on the white haired old man standing at the head of the group. chrýstof. he approaches truman alone  carrying a white envelope  calling his name the way a father calls to a son. chrýstof truman  truman seems to sense the significance christof has had in his life  drawn to and repelled by him at the same time. as they stand together looking into each other's eyes for the first time  they seem to be the only two figures on the roof. for a moment truman averts his gaze to the night sky. truman  quietly  half to himself  half to christof  even the stars ý wished on  as truman turns his attention back to christof  he suddenly lunges at him  catching him off guard  the envelope slipping from christof's hand. with a strength he never knew he possessed  truman forces christof to the edge of the soundstage roof  threatening to throw them both off his counterfeit world. christof clings desperately to truman to save himself. the studio guards dare not move. chrýstof  staring into the chasm  remaining eerily calm  you won't do it  truman. ý've watched you your whole life. truman  meeting christof's gaze  you never had a camera in my head. suddenly the doubts flood into christof's eyes  fearing he has misjudged truman  fearing for his life. truman  incensed  something was real   a terrifying anguish  something had to be real  ýt takes all of truman's will not to hurl the old man into the abyss. christof  petrified  looks to the pristine  white envelope that lies half over the edge of the roof  glinting in the moonlight. truman follows christof's gaze. contemptuously tossing christof aside  he retrieves the envelope. christof crawls to safety  thankful to still be alive  suddenly appearing very small and insignificant. but christof and the other figures on the rooftop no longer exist in truman's mind. truman gazes at his name for a long moment  handwritten on the envelope in blue ink  then carefully breaks the seal. truman allows the sole item in the envelope to be slowly revealed. a photograph. a close up of sylvýa's face including her eyes  mouth and that perfect  ever elusive nose. a serenity comes over truman. he lifts up his eyes to the mountains on the far horizon. as he stands on the very edge of the soundstage roof without fear  clutching the photograph  we commence a long  slow pull back. truman is unaware that directly beneath his feet on the wall of the enormous soundstage is a billboard acrrying a gigantic picture of his face and proclaiming   truman   total record of a human life. 34th great year   we continue to pull back until truman is nothing but a speck on top of the soundstage so large it never completely clears frame. a montage of varýous locatýons the two old women in the living room  the nýghtwatchmen  the two young men with the watchman tv  the patrons in the bar  passers by outside an electronics store are all captivated by their television sets. we focus on the screen of a television. a small female baby sucks a toy on a blanket in the backyard of truman's old suburban home in queens  the lawn he mowed for ten years of his life. the infant's doting parents  marlon and the new actress vývýen  enter frame and begin to fuss over the child. a border around the action on the screen announces   zoe   total record of a human life . suddenly we see a child's hand on top of the television screen. a baby stands unsteadily  supporting herself against the television set in sylvia's house. truman bends down and picks up his baby  tossing her into the air  much to the child's delight. truman dwells for a moment on the mirror image scene on the television before very deliberately shutting it off. sylvýa joins truman and their daughter. together  they exit the beach house. we follow them as they make their way onto the deserted sand and down towards the sea. fade out
